---
layout: post
title: CMake 
tags: [ Everything ]
comments : true
---

CMake is an open source cross platform tool to build software projects.
CMake generates build pipeline for the platform, which is then used to build the project. In simpler language, CMake generates files required to build the project. For a C++ project, the output of CMake is a build pipeline which can be anything from a Visual Studio Project to Linux Makefiles, based on the selected generator.

CMake introduces a lot of complexity into the build system but fear not as this complexity is abstracted from the user. A user is never expected to modify the generated build pipeline.

To use CMake, a CMakeLists.txt file is required in the source directory of the project. This file contains all the build instructions.
A recommended way to build a project is to create a new directory named ```build```, which is different from the source directory. From the build directory, execute ```cmake <Source Directory>```

This will generate a build pipeline. For the sake of simplicity, let's assume we are on a linux machine, and the build pipeline generated is a Makefile.
Generating build pipeline in a seperate build directory have the advantage of seperating the build files from project source files. 
All the build artifacts are in this directory, and can be deleted for cleanup.

The most basic CMake for a project is:
```
cmake_minimum_required(VERSION 2.9)
project(BasicProject)
add_executable(BasicProject, main.cpp)
```

Below is a sample CMakeLists.txt
* * *

### Some Interesting Cmake Command Arguments
* ```cmake <source directory> -p``` runs the script but don't generate a pipeline.
* ```cmake <source directory> -j n```, runs the build process on n threads in parallel, if possible.

**CMake is more like a scripting language** and is very flexible. Let's go over the basic building blocks of CMake Scripting.

### message
```message("Building Core library.")```
message prints the message. Very useful for printing status messages.

### Variables
Every varible in CMake is a string. A variable is reference by specifying the name of variable in ${}. This is also known as variable reference.
Variables can be set by:
* Set command
  ```set (Number, 42) ```
  This sets the variable Number to 42.
  The statement ```message("The Ultimate Answer is ${Number}")``` prints *The Ultimate Answer is 42*.
* Varibles can be defined on command line 
  ```$ cmake -DNumber 42```
Quotes around arguments are optional as long as there are no spaces or reference variable.

### Flow Control
Cmake supports ```if``` statement and ```while``` loop.

```
    if(Linux)
      message("Building on Linux")
    endif()
``` 

```
    while(num LESS 42)
      message("Number is still less than 42.")
   endwhile()
```

### Including Scripts
  ```include ( <FileName.cmake> )``` command is used to load and execute CMake from other the file provided. This is generally used to find third party packages. For example, a project using Boost, may have ```include (Boost.cmake)``` which can be used to find boost installation before building.
  
  ```add_subdirectory ( <source subdirectory> )``` creates a new scope and executes the CMakeLists.txt from the subdirectory.

### Include Directories
  To set up the include directories ```include_directories ( <directoryName> )``` is used.
  
### Libraries
  *pending stuff*
  *create shared and static libraries*
  
### Targets
  ```add_executable```, ```add_target_library```, ```add_custom_target``` commands defines targets.
  For example, 
  ```
  add_executable (MyBinary, MyBinary.cpp)         \\creates binary named MyBinary
  add_executable (CoolStuffBinary, CoolStuff.cpp) \\creates binary named MyBinary
  ```
  Here CMake creates build targets for each executable. By default an ```all``` target is also created which is called which is executed if no specific target is specified.
  
  *pending stuff about add_library, add_target_library and custom_target*
  
### Custom Commands
  *pending explanation*
  
### Scratching the Surface
  There is so much more in CMake, that this post can barely scratch the surface. 
  Some other interesting features in cmake include generators, regular expressions etc.
  
